Level 1 Mini boss: Eigenvectors
This post is about Eigenvalue/eigenvectors and it is supposed to give you a fascinating insight about them. For this reason, I am going to be introducing a lot of, not so crazy, assumptions to construct an environment for you to see how you can look at these things from a new perspective. First things first, let’s reiterate what an eigenvalue/eigenvector is: basically, imagine a vector which stays the same when transformed by a square matrix.

When we say transformed, we simply mean transforming our old vector into a new one, like rotating or scaling it. We can do transformations by multiplying the vector by a matrix, which we call transformation matrix.

Let’s also say this matrix has n different eigenvectors and eigenvalues. If the direction of any vector aligns with any of the eigenvectors, the only transformation would be the rescaling of our vector with the amount of the corresponding eigenvalue.


For the sake of the simplicity, let’s also say we have a bunch of points which together represent a circle in 2D dimension. What happens if we transform them by a matrix? Spoiler alert, our circle gets stretched into an ellipse. Let’s see how it happens: let us define this bunch of points by the following set.


Also, someone told us that the matrix has an eigenvalue decomposition in the following form.


using these properties, we can expand the transformation of the vector as the following:


Here is the fun part: the last equation states that when we transform a vector, we are projecting the vector on the eigenvectors, multiplying the components by the corresponding eigenvalues and finally reconstructing the vector in the space with eigenvectors as the new basis vectors. The following figure shows an example of a circle with radius one transforming into an ellipse.


a circle transforming into an ellipse
I hope now you have a basic understanding of why we calculate eigenvectors and eigenvalues. There are a lot of intuition and applications hidden in the concept. As an application example, for those of you coming from an engineering background, you probably heard about Cauchy stress tensor, which is used to organize the stress tensors. Using this matrix, people would compute eigenvectors and eigenvalues to determine the principal normal stresses and the direction it is applied, in order to check if the material can sustain tolerate such stress configurations without breaking.


P.S.: From now on, I will try to recommend some references (textbooks, online courses and etc.). When I was 19, I bought the book “Linear Algebra” by Gilbert Strang and spent my whole summer reading through it. It was and is one of the best resources on Linear Algebra out there. Also, here is a mini course by the master himself, to boost your understanding of linear algebra.


A course by Gilbert Strang
